+++
title = 'Assignment 4'
date = 2025-07-16
tags = ["MIT 18.100A"]
draft = false
+++

url: [https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/18-100a-real-analysis-fall-2020/resources/mit18_100af20_hw4/](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/18-100a-real-analysis-fall-2020/resources/mit18_100af20_hw4/)

Chapters and exercises given with a numbering are from *Basic Analysis: Introduction to
Real Analysis (Vol I)* by J. Lebl.

### Problem 1

We say a set \( F \subset \mathbb{R} \) is closed if its complement \( F^c := \mathbb{R} \setminus F \) is open. Since \( \emptyset \) and \( \mathbb{R} \) are open, it follows that \( \emptyset \) and \( \mathbb{R} \) are closed as well.

(a) Let \( a, b \in \mathbb{R} \) with \( a < b \). Prove that \([a,b]\) is closed.

> Proving \([a, b]\) is closed is equivalent to prove \((-\infty, a) \cup (b, +\infty)\) is open. See Assignment 3 [Problem 5](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-5)(a).

(b) Is the set \( \mathbb{Z} \subset \mathbb{R} \) closed? Provide a proof to substantiate your claim.

> Yes. We show that \( \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Z} \) is open.  \( \forall x \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Z} \), let \( z_0 \) be the closest \( z \in \mathbb{Z} \), i.e., \( z_0 = \arg\min_{z \in \mathbb{Z}} |x - z| \).  Then \( \exists \ \varepsilon = \frac{|x - z_0|}{2} \), s.t.  \((x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \subset \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Z} \).

(c) Is the set of rationals \( \mathbb{Q} \subset \mathbb{R} \) closed? Provide a proof to substantiate your claim.

> Yes, because \( \mathbb{Q} \subset \mathbb{R} \) is not open.   See [A3P5](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-5)(d).

### Problem 2

(a) Let \( \Lambda \) be a set (not necessarily a subset of \( \mathbb{R} \)), and for each \( \lambda \in \Lambda \), let \( F_\lambda \subset \mathbb{R} \). Prove that if \( F_\lambda \) is closed for all \( \lambda \in \Lambda \), then the set  
\[
\bigcap_{\lambda \in \Lambda} F_\lambda = \{ x \in \mathbb{R} : x \in F_\lambda \text{ for all } \lambda \in \Lambda \}
\]  
is closed.

> Since \( F_\lambda \) is closed, then \( F_\lambda^c \) is open.  By [A3P5](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-5)(b),  \(\bigcup_{\lambda \in \Lambda} F_\lambda^c\)  is open. Thus  \(\left( \bigcup_{\lambda \in \Lambda} F_\lambda^c \right)^c = \bigcap_{\lambda \in \Lambda} F_\lambda\)  is closed.

(b) Let \( n \in \mathbb{N} \), and let \( F_1, \ldots, F_n \subset \mathbb{R} \). Prove that if \( F_1, \ldots, F_n \) are closed then the set \( \bigcup_{m=1}^n F_m \) is closed.

> \( F_1^c, \ldots, F_n^c \) are open, by [A3P5](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-5)(c), \(\bigcap_{m=1}^n F_m^c\) is an open set.  Thus  \(\left( \bigcap_{m=1}^n F_m^c \right)^c = \bigcup_{m=1}^n F_m\)  is closed.

### Problem 3

Let \( F \subset \mathbb{R} \) be a closed set, and let \( \{x_n\} \) be a sequence of elements of \( F \) converging to \( x \in \mathbb{R} \). Prove that \( x \in F \).

*Hint: Assume that \( x \notin F \) and arrive at a contradiction.*

> Assume \( x \in F^c \). Given \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x \), then  \( \forall \varepsilon > 0, \exists M \in \mathbb{N}, \forall n > M \),  
>
> \[ |x_n - x| < \varepsilon \Rightarrow x - \varepsilon < x_n < x + \varepsilon \]
>
> Since \( F \subset \mathbb{R} \) is closed, so \( F^c \) is open.  \( x \in F^c \Rightarrow  x_n\in (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \subset F^c \),  which contradicts with \( x_n \in F \). Thus \( x \in F \).

### Exercise 2.2.3

Prove that if \( \{x_n\}_{n=1}^\infty \) is a convergent sequence, \( k \in \mathbb{N} \), then  
\[
\lim_{n \to \infty} x_n^k = \left( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n \right)^k
\]

*Hint: Use induction.*

> Let \( x := \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n \).  
>
> (i) \( k = 1 \),  \(\lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x\)
> 
> (ii) Suppose when \( k = m \in \mathbb{N} \),  \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n^m = x^m \). That is, let \( \varepsilon > 0 \), \(
> \exists M_1 \in \mathbb{N}, \text{ for all } n > M_1, \ |x_n^m - x^m| < \frac{\varepsilon}{2(1 + |x|)}\)
>
> Since \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x \), \(\exists M_2 \in \mathbb{N}, \forall n > M_2, \ |x_n - x| < \frac{\varepsilon}{2(1 + |x_n^m|)}\)
>
> \[\begin{aligned}
|x_n^{m+1} - x^{m+1}| &= |x_n^m x_n - x_n^m x + x_n^m x - x^m x|\\
& \leq |x_n^m| \cdot |x_n - x| + |x| \cdot |x_n^m - x^m|\\
& < |x_n^m| \cdot \frac{\varepsilon}{2(1 + |x_n^m|)} + |x| \cdot \frac{\varepsilon}{2(1 + |x|)} < \varepsilon
\end{aligned}\]
>
> \( \therefore \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n^{m+1} = x^{m+1} \)

### Exercise 2.2.5

Let \( x_n := \frac{n - \cos(n)}{n} \). Use the squeeze lemma to show that \( \{x_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty} \) converges and find the limit.

> \( x_n = \frac{n - \cos(n)}{n} = 1 - \frac{\cos(n)}{n} \). Since \( -1 \leq \cos(n) \leq 1 \), we get: \( 1 - \frac{1}{n} \leq x_n \leq 1 + \frac{1}{n} \)  
>
> Since \( \lim_{n \to \infty} (1 - \frac{1}{n}) = 1 \) and  \( \lim_{n \to \infty} (1 + \frac{1}{n}) = 1 \),  by the squeeze lemma,  \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = 1 \)

### Problem 6

Let \( A \subset \mathbb{R} \) be bounded above, and let \( a_0 \) be an upper bound for \( A \). Prove that  
\( a_0 = \sup A \) if and only if there exists a sequence \( \{a_n\} \subset A \) such that \( \lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = a_0 \).

*Hint: By Assignment 3, if \( a_0 = \sup A \), then for all \( n \in \mathbb{N} \), there exists \( a_n \in A \) such that*  
\[ a_0 - \frac{1}{n} < a_n \leq a_0 \]

> (⇒) Given \( a_0 = \sup A \), construct \( a_n = a_0 - \frac{1}{n} \), then  \( \lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = a_0 \)  
>
> (⇐) If \( \exists \{a_n\}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}, a_n \in A \), such that  \( \lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = a_0 \), then  \( \forall \varepsilon > 0, \exists M \in \mathbb{N} \), for \( n > M \),  
> \( |a_n - a_0| < \varepsilon \Rightarrow a_0 - \varepsilon < a_n < a_0 + \varepsilon \). 
> 
> Since \( a_0 \) is an upper bound of \( A \), and \( a_n \leq a_0 \), it follows that \( a_0 - \varepsilon < a_n \leq a_0 \)  
>
> By [A3P4](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-4), \( a_0 = \sup A \).

### Problem 7

Let \( E \subset \mathbb{R} \) be a nonempty set of real numbers. We say \( x \in \mathbb{R} \) is a *cluster point* of \( E \) if for every \( \varepsilon > 0 \),  
\[ (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \cap (E \setminus \{x\}) \neq \emptyset \]

Said less formally, \( x \) is a cluster point of \( E \) if every interval containing \( x \) contains at least one element of \( E \) other than \( x \).

(a) Prove that \( x \) is a cluster point of \( E \) if and only if there exists a sequence \( \{x_n\} \) of elements of \( E \setminus \{x\} \) such that \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x \)

*Hint: If \( x \) is a cluster point of \( E \), then for all \( n \in \mathbb{N} \) there exists \( x_n \in E \) with \( x_n \neq x \) such that*  
\[ x - \frac{1}{n} < x_n < x + \frac{1}{n} \]

> Denote \( S := (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \cap (E \setminus \{x\}) \)  
>
> (⇒) If \( x \) is a cluster point, then \( \forall \varepsilon > 0, S \neq \emptyset \). For each \( n \in \mathbb{N} \), choose \( x_n \in E \setminus \{x\} \) such that \( |x_n - x| < \frac{1}{n} \). So \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x \).
>
> (⇐) If \( x_n \in E \setminus \{x\} \) with \( \lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = x \), let \( \varepsilon > 0 \), then \( \exists M \in \mathbb{N} \) such that \( n > M \Rightarrow |x_n - x| < \varepsilon \Rightarrow x_n \in (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \). Then \( x_n \in S \), so \( S \neq \emptyset \).

(b) Prove that the set of all cluster points of \( E \) is closed.

> Define \( A := \{ x \in \mathbb{R} : x \text{ is a cluster point of } E \} \). To show \( A \) is closed, we show \( \mathbb{R} \setminus A \) is open.  
>
> Let \( x \in \mathbb{R} \setminus A \), then \( \exists \varepsilon > 0 \) such that \( (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \cap (E \setminus \{x\}) = \emptyset \). Let \( y \in (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \), then \( \exists \delta > 0 \) such that \( (y - \delta, y + \delta) \subset (x - \varepsilon, x + \varepsilon) \).
>
> If \( y \neq x \), then \( x \notin \{y\} \), so \( (y - \delta, y + \delta) \cap E \subset \{x\} \Rightarrow (y - \delta, y + \delta) \cap (E \setminus \{y\}) \subset \{x\} \).  Let \( \delta = \frac{|y - x|}{2} \), then \( x \notin (y - \delta, y + \delta) \), so \( (y - \delta, y + \delta) \cap (E \setminus \{y\}) = \emptyset \). Thus \( y \) is not a cluster point \(\Rightarrow y \notin A \Rightarrow y \in \mathbb{R} \setminus A \)  
>
> We proved \( \mathbb{R} \setminus A\) is an open set, then \( A \) is closed.
