---
title: Assignment 7
parent: MIT 18.100A
nav_order: 7
math: true
toc: true
---

# Assignment 7
{: .no_toc}

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

url: [https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/18-100a-real-analysis-fall-2020/resources/mit18_100af20_hw7/](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/18-100a-real-analysis-fall-2020/resources/mit18_100af20_hw7/)

Chapters and exercises given with a numbering are from *Basic Analysis: Introduction to
Real Analysis (Vol I)* by J. Lebl.

### Exercise 2.6.2

Suppose both $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty a_n $ and $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty b_n $ converge absolutely. Show that the product series, $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty c_n $ where

$$ c_n = a_0 b_n + a_1 b_{n-1} + \cdots + a_n b_0 $$  

also converges absolutely.

> $\vert c_n\vert  = \left\vert  \sum_{k=0}^n a_k b_{n-k} \right\vert  \leq \sum_{k=0}^n \vert a_k\vert \vert b_{n-k}\vert $, then
>
> $$
\sum_{n=0}^\infty \vert c_n\vert  \leq \sum_{n=0}^\infty \sum_{k=0}^n \vert a_k\vert \vert b_{n-k}\vert  = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \sum_{n=k}^\infty \vert a_k\vert \vert b_{n-k}\vert = \left( \sum_{k=0}^\infty \vert a_k\vert  \right) \left( \sum_{m=0}^\infty \vert b_m\vert  \right)
$$
>
> Since $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty a_n $, $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty b_n $ converge absolutely,  $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty \vert c_n\vert  $ converges by comparison test.

### Problem 2

Find all real numbers $ x $ so that the series converges.

(a) $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty 2^n x^n $  

> $$
\limsup_{n \to \infty} \vert 2^n x^n\vert ^{1/n} = \limsup_{n \to \infty} \vert 2x\vert  = \vert 2x\vert  < 1 \Rightarrow x \in \left(-\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} \right)
$$

(b) $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty n x^n $  

> $$
\limsup_{n \to \infty} \vert n x^n\vert ^{1/n} = \limsup_{n \to \infty} \vert n\vert ^{1/n} \vert x\vert  = \vert x\vert  < 1 \Rightarrow x \in (-1, 1)
$$

(c) $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty \frac{1}{(2n)!} (x - 10)^n $  

> $$
\limsup_{n \to \infty} \left\vert  \frac{(x - 10)^n}{(2n)!} \right\vert ^{1/n} = \limsup_{n \to \infty} \frac{\vert x - 10\vert }{((2n)!)^{1/n}} = 0 \Rightarrow x \in \mathbb{R}
$$

(d) $ \sum_{n=0}^\infty n! x^n $

> $$
\limsup_{n \to \infty} \vert n! x^n\vert ^{1/n} = \limsup_{n \to \infty} (n!)^{1/n} \vert x\vert 
$$  
>
> Since $ n! = 1 \cdot 2 \cdot \ldots \cdot n > \left( \frac{n}{2} \right)^{n/2} $, so  
> $$
(n!)^{1/n} > \left[ \left( \frac{n}{2} \right)^{n/2} \right]^{1/n} = \sqrt{\frac{n}{2}}
$$  
>
> Because $ \sqrt{\frac{n}{2}} \to \infty $, $ (n!)^{1/n} $ diverges.  Thus $ \sum n! x^n $ converges only if $ x = 0 $.

### Problem 3 (Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality)

Prove that if $ \sum \vert x_n\vert ^2 $ and $ \sum \vert y_n\vert ^2 $ converge, then the series $ \sum x_n y_n $ converges absolutely and  
$$
\sum_{n=1}^\infty x_n y_n \leq \left( \sum_{n=1}^\infty \vert x_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^\infty \vert y_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2}
$$

> Show that  
> $$
\left\vert  \sum_{n=1}^m x_n y_n \right\vert  \leq \left( \sum_{n=1}^m \vert x_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^m \vert y_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2}
$$
>
> By induction, base case $ m=1 $, $ x_1 y_1 = x_1 y_1 $. If this inequality holds for $ m = k $, then at $ m = k+1 $,
>
> $$
\begin{aligned}
\left\vert  \sum_{n=1}^{k+1} x_n y_n \right\vert  &= \left\vert  \sum_{n=1}^k x_n y_n + x_{k+1} y_{k+1} \right\vert  \\
&\leq \left( \sum_{n=1}^k \vert x_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^k \vert y_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} + \left( \vert x_{k+1}\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \vert y_{k+1}\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \\
&\leq \left( \sum_{n=1}^k \vert x_n\vert ^2 + \vert x_{k+1}\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^k \vert y_n\vert ^2 + \vert y_{k+1}\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \\
&= \left( \sum_{n=1}^{k+1} \vert x_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^{k+1} \vert y_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2}
\end{aligned}
$$
>
> Then take limits $ m \to \infty $, since $ \sum \vert x_n\vert ^2 $, $ \sum \vert y_n\vert ^2 $ converge,  $ \sum \vert x_n y_n\vert  $ converges by comparison test. Therefore,
>
> $$
\sum_{n=1}^\infty \vert x_n y_n\vert  \leq \left( \sum_{n=1}^\infty \vert x_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2} \left( \sum_{n=1}^\infty \vert y_n\vert ^2 \right)^{1/2}
$$

### Problem 4 

Prove that every real number is a cluster point of the set of irrational numbers.

> Assume for contradiction that there exists $ x \in \mathbb{R} $, $ \delta > 0 $, such that:
$$
(x - \delta, x + \delta) \cap (\mathbb{R} \setminus \{\mathbb{Q},\{x\}\}) = \emptyset
$$
> 
> That is, the interval $ (x - \delta, x + \delta) $ contains no irrational numbers.
>
> Then $(x - \delta, x + \delta) \subseteq \mathbb{Q}$, taking the complement:
$$
(-\infty,x - \delta] \cup  [x + \delta,\infty) \cup \{\mathbb{Q},\{x\}\} = \mathbb{R}
$$
>
> That is $(-\infty,x - \delta] \cup  [x + \delta,\infty) \cup \{x\} = \mathbb{R}\setminus\mathbb{Q}$. But since $ \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q} $ is dense in $ \mathbb{R} $ (see [Assignment 3](/courses/mit18100a/a3/#problem-1)), there must exist some $ y \in \mathbb{R} \setminus \mathbb{Q} $ such that $ y \in (x - \delta, x + \delta) $, which contradicts the equation.


### Exercise 3.1.13

Suppose $ S \subseteq \mathbb{R} $, and let $ c $ be a cluster point of $ S $. Suppose $ f: S \to \mathbb{R} $ is bounded. Show that there exists a sequence $\{x_n\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ with $ x_n \in S \setminus \{c\} $ and $\lim_{n \to \infty} x_n = c$, for which the sequence $\{f(x_n)\}_{n=1}^{\infty}$ converges.

> Since $ c $ is a cluster point of $ S $, there exists a sequence $\{y_n\}$ such that $ y_n \in S \setminus \{c\} $ for all $ n \in \mathbb{N} $, and $\lim_{n \to \infty} y_n = c$.
> 
> Because $ f $ is bounded, there exists a constant $ M > 0 $ such that $ \vert f(x)\vert  \leq M $ for all $ x \in S $. Hence, the sequence $\{f(y_n)\}$ is bounded, that is, $ \vert f(y_n)\vert  \leq M $ for all $ n $.
> 
> By the Bolzano–Weierstrass Theorem, the sequence $\{f(y_n)\}$ has a convergent subsequence $\{f(y_{n_k})\}$, i.e. $\lim_{k \to \infty} f(y_{n_k}) = L$ for some $ L \in \mathbb{R} $.
> 
> Define the sequence $\{x_k\}$ by $ x_k = y_{n_k} $. Then:
> - $ x_k = y_{n_k} \in S \setminus \{c\} $ for all $ k \in \mathbb{N} $, since $\{y_n\}$ lies in $ S \setminus \{c\} $,
> - $\lim_{k \to \infty} x_k = \lim_{k \to \infty} y_{n_k} = c $, because $\{y_n\} \to c$, so does any subsequence,
> - The sequence $\{f(x_k)\} = \{f(y_{n_k})\}$ converges (to $ L $).
> 
> Therefore, the sequence $\{x_k\}$ satisfies the required properties. Renaming the index, the sequence $\{x_n\}$ is the desired one.

### Problem 6

Let $ S \subset \mathbb{R} $, let $ c $ be a cluster point of $ S $, and let $ f : S \to \mathbb{R} $.

(a) Assume $ \lim_{x \to c} f(x) $ exists. Prove that there exist $ B \geq 0 $ and $ \delta > 0 $ such that if $ x \in S $ and $ 0 < \vert x - c\vert  < \delta $ then $ \vert f(x)\vert  \leq B $.

> Denote $ L := \lim_{x \to c} f(x) $.  For all $ \varepsilon > 0 $, there exists $ \delta > 0 $ such that if $ x \in S $ and $ 0 < \vert x - c\vert  < \delta $, then  $\vert f(x) - L\vert  < \varepsilon$.
>
> Let $ \varepsilon = 1 $, choose $ B = \vert L\vert  + 1 $, then  
> $$
\vert f(x)\vert  = \vert f(x) - L + L\vert  \leq \vert f(x) - L\vert  + \vert L\vert  < 1 + \vert L\vert  = B
$$

(b) Assume that $ \lim_{x \to c} f(x) = L > 0 $. Prove that there exists $ \delta > 0 $ such that  if $ x \in S $ and $ 0 < \vert x - c\vert  < \delta $, then $ f(x) > 0 $.

> For all $ \varepsilon > 0 $, there exists $ \delta > 0 $ such that if $ x \in S $ and $ 0 < \vert x - c\vert  < \delta $,  
> $$
\vert f(x) - L\vert  < \varepsilon \Rightarrow L - \varepsilon < f(x) < L + \varepsilon
$$
>
> Since $ L > 0 $, let $ \varepsilon = \frac{L}{2} > 0 $, then  
> $$
L - \varepsilon = \frac{L}{2} > 0 \Rightarrow f(x) > 0
$$

